Total pages: 19
--- Page 1 ---
This paper is included in the Proceedings of the 23rd USENIX Symposium 
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation.
May 4–6, 2026 • Renton, WA, USA
ISBN 978-1-939133-54-0
Open access to the Proceedings of the 23rd USENIX Symposium  
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation is sponsored byZooRoute: Enhancing Cloud-Scale Network Reliability 
via Candidate Path Provisioning and Overlay  
Proactive Rerouting
Xiaoqing Sun, Alibaba Cloud; Xing Li, Zhejiang University and Alibaba Cloud;  
Xionglie Wei, Tian Pan, Ju Zhang, Bowen Yang, Yi Wang, Ye Yang, Yu Qi, Le Yu,  
Chenhao Jia, Zhanlong Zhang, Xinyu Chen, Xiaobo Xue, Jianyuan Lu, Shize Zhang,  
Enge Song, and Yang Song, Alibaba Cloud; Rong Wen, Fudan University and Alibaba Cloud; 
Biao Lyu, Alibaba Cloud and Hangzhou Alibaba Cloud Feitian Information Technology  
and Hangzhou Alibaba Feitian Information Technology; Yang Xu, Fudan University; 
Shunmin Zhu, Alibaba Cloud and Hangzhou Feitian Cloud
https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi26/presentation/sun
--- Page 2 ---
ZooRoute: Enhancing Cloud-Scale Network Reliability via Candidate Path
Provisioning and Overlay Proactive Rerouting
Xiaoqing Sun1†, Xing Li2,1†, Xionglie Wei1†, Tian Pan1⋆, Ju Zhang1, Bowen Yang1, Yi Wang1
Ye Yang1, Yu Qi1, Le Yu1, Chenhao Jia1, Zhanlong Zhang1, Xinyu Chen1, Xiaobo Xue1, Jianyuan Lu1
Shize Zhang1, Enge Song1, Yang Song1, Rong Wen4,1, Biao Lyu1,3,5, Yang Xu4, Shunmin Zhu1,6⋆
1Alibaba Cloud2Zhejiang University3Hangzhou Alibaba Cloud Feitian Information Technology
4Fudan University5Hangzhou Alibaba Feitian Information Technology6Hangzhou Feitian Cloud
Abstract
Failures are inevitable in production-scale cloud networks,
making reliability a critical concern for both cloud service
providers (CSPs) and their tenants. Existing network failure
recovery solutions either fail to provide timely failover or
require underlay upgrades, forcing tenants to deploy their
own high availability systems with additional CapEx & OpEx.
However, most tenants lack the expertise or willingness to
invest in such systems but are highly sensitive to service
disruptions. This motivates CSPs to assume the responsibility
of fast and deterministic failure recovery as a cloud service.
In this paper, we present ZooRoute , a tenant-transparent,
underlay-agnostic network failure recovery service in Alibaba
Cloud. ZooRoute utilizes the overlay layer and enables failure
bypass by modifying the outer source ports during VXLAN
encapsulation. For each destination IP, a set of source port can-
didates are maintained by proactive probing between tunnel
endpoints to guarantee one-shot deterministic traffic reroute
onto healthy paths. Scaling such design at planet-scale cloud
infrastructures brings challenges such as probing overhead at
hypervisors, memory consumption at Tofino gateways, and
service disruptions at stateful middleboxes, which we address
with a range of novel techniques. Deployed in Alibaba Cloud
for 26 months, ZooRoute has significantly improved network
reliability, reducing cumulative outage time by 93.19% and
masking 98.21% of failures from tenant awareness.
1 Introduction
The rapid growth of cloud computing has fueled a broad shift
of applications to public clouds for scalability, flexibility, and
cost efficiency [4]. To this end, cloud service providers (CSPs)
operate planet-scale infrastructures to host workloads from
millions of tenants, where ensuring high reliability is their top
priority. However, link- or node-level failures are inevitable at
such scale [29 –32], leading to service disruptions and tenant
losses. Moreover, we observe that, due to a lack of coordina-
tion with the underlying infrastructure, tenant-level recovery
†Co-first authors.⋆Co-corresponding authors.
Physical layer (servers, switches, etc.) Applicationlayer (Guest OS)
Overlaylayer (Multi-tenant virtualization)
Fast reroute [11, 51]
Protective reroute [4, 48, 64, 68]…
Traffic engineering [8, 34, 58, 73]
Network partitioning [20, 33, 39-41]
Multi-path protocols [19, 69, 78]
Active/standby redundancy [15, 35]…Figure 1: Recovery solutions in public cloud networks.
can surprisingly amplify transient network downtime at the
application layer. Although telemetry systems [24, 31, 60, 81]
enable CSPs to promptly detect these failures, the subsequent
diagnosis and repair still rely on On-Call Engineers (OCEs)
and can take minutes to hours, depending on the root causes.
Existing network recovery solutions struggle to meet strin-
gent server-level agreements (SLAs) or impose burdens on
tenants. As Fig. 1 shows, public cloud networks comprise
three layers: the physical layer with underlying devices, the
overlay layer providing virtual networks for tenants, and
the application layer where tenants run their own services.
When failures occur, physical-layer solutions either suffer
long recovery times [9, 35, 59, 74], rely on underlay up-
grades [21, 34, 40 –42, 69], intrude on tenant traffic [5, 49, 65]
or cannot guarantee deterministic recovery [5, 49, 65, 69]. For
instance, traffic engineering can bypass failures globally but
takes minutes to act [9, 35, 59, 74]. Protective reroute [69]
redirects traffic by modifying the IPv6 Flow Label, requiring
a recent kernel version, an IPv6 underlay, and device sup-
port for Flow Label hashing. Moreover, protective reroute is
opportunistic trial-and-error, without deterministic recovery
guarantee. Consequently, tenants are compelled to build their
own high availability solutions, most involving redundant re-
sources [16, 36] or protocol stack modifications [20, 70, 79],
increasing capital and operating expenses (CapEx & OpEx).
Most tenants lack the expertise or willingness to invest
in their own high availability architectures but are sensitive
to service disruptions, motivating us to assume the respon-
USENIX Association 23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    509
--- Page 3 ---
sibility of fast failure recovery as a cloud service. In this
work, we propose ZooRoute , a tenant-transparent, underlay-
agnostic fast network failure recovery service in Alibaba
Cloud. ZooRoute provides a unified framework for diverse
cloud network scenarios, exploits path diversity for reliability,
ensures fast and deterministic recovery, and remains agnostic
to heterogeneous underlay devices. Specifically, ZooRoute
manipulates the source ports in the "outer" packet headers
during overlay encapsulation, which influences Equal Cost
Multi-Path (ECMP) hashing in physical switches and routers,
thus inducing traffic reroute to alternative paths. To guarantee
deterministic recovery, ZooRoute deploys distributed agents
on tunnel endpoints ( e.g., hypervisor, gateway, middlebox)
to proactively probe path status using varying source ports
and maintain telemetry records. Available source ports, rep-
resenting healthy path candidates, will be assigned to tenant
traffic immediately to deterministically bypass failures. As
operated at the overlay layer, this "path probing, path record-
ing, path switching" mechanism is imperceptible to tenants,
agnostic to underlying devices, and supports deterministic
global recovery within seconds.
ZooRoute provisions candidate paths to enable determin-
istic recovery, but doing so at cloud scale introduces signif-
icant challenges: Challenge 1: Massive probed end-hosts
vs restricted telemetry budget. Network-wide telemetry is
the basis of candidate path provisioning but full-mesh and
high-frequency end-to-end probing in production-scale net-
works consume substantial CPU cycles. ZooRoute conducts
segmented probing at tunnel endpoints, probing only for ac-
tive IPs/source ports, and source port learning for stateful
middleboxes, reducing 95%+ telemetry cost. Besides, it adap-
tively adjusts probing frequency based on host CPU utiliza-
tion to avoid resource contention. Challenge 2: Huge path
table vs limited on-chip memory. Recording source port
states is essential for one-shot traffic rerouting onto healthy
paths. However, large CSPs often rely on hardware accel-
erators at critical nodes ( e.g., Tofino-based gateway in Al-
ibaba) [14, 26, 48, 51, 53, 55], where on-chip memory is inher-
ently limited. ZooRoute records source ports with priority-
based bitmaps and hierarchical indexing, achieving 15x and
25x compression, respectively. Besides, it accelerates table en-
try updates by three orders of magnitude compared with PCIe
via packet-triggered table update, ensuring rapid updates of a
vast number of paths when severe failures occur. Challenge
3: Path switching vs middlebox stateful forwarding. Path
switching may disrupt tenant services, especially for stateful
middleboxes ( e.g., SLB, NAT) in public clouds. Modifying
source ports may trigger reconnections due to missing ses-
sions as traffic is redirected to a different middlebox instance.
ZooRoute incorporates a middlebox sensing mechanism that
aggregates the source ports corresponding to the same middle-
box into the same group. By only selecting source ports within
the same group, it ensures that connections are consistently
hashed to the same middlebox during path switching.Our major contributions are summarized as follows:
•We propose ZooRoute, the first overlay-based deterministic
network failure recovery service. It is tenant-transparent and
enables global failure bypass in large-scale cloud networks
(for both intra-region and inter-region) within seconds, with-
out requiring any modification to the network underlay.
•We propose a range of techniques such as on-demand prob-
ing, dynamic frequency adjustment, path table compres-
sion, packet-triggered table update, and middlebox sensing
to reduce telemetry costs, manage path states and prevent
unnecessary reconnections, enabling ZooRoute to operate
deterministically in production-scale CSP networks.
•During 26 months of deployment in Alibaba Cloud cover-
ing all 33 regions, 500k+ servers, and millions of tenants,
ZooRoute reduced 93.19% network outage time and masked
98.21% failures without tenant awareness. We share empir-
ical experiences, typical use cases and research insights.
2 Background and Motivation
2.1 Public Cloud Networks
Fig. 2 shows a typical public cloud network with three layers:
the physical and overlay layers operated by CSPs, and the
tenant-visible application layer, consisting of purchased re-
sources and services ( e.g., VM [3], vSwitch1[8], vRouter [6],
SLB [7]). In the physical layer, CSPs deploy geographically
distributed Internet data centers (IDCs) and connect them
through private WANs for high-speed communication. For ex-
ample, Alibaba Cloud operates 90 IDCs across 33 regions, and
more than 15% of tenants run cross-region workloads. Multi-
path topologies are used within and across IDCs to increase
capacity and path diversity, improving reliability [10, 35].
The overlay layer serves as an intermediary enabling ten-
ant traffic to access the shared physical network, providing
physical resource virtualization and inter-tenant isolation [39].
Tenant packets are encapsulated with tunnel headers ( e.g.,
VXLAN [50], NVGRE [28]), allowing VMs across regions
to communicate in a unified address space, while isolation
is enforced via virtual network identifiers (VNIs). At the
overlay layer, hypervisors, gateways, and middleboxes act
as VXLAN tunnel endpoints (VTEPs), responsible for encap-
sulating and decapsulating tunnel headers, and forwarding
traffic according to VXLAN routing tables and VM-server
mapping tables. Specifically, hypervisors, deployed on each
server, forward VM traffic [19, 25, 26, 44, 45, 56, 68]. Cloud
gateways, located at traffic aggregation points, handle VM-to-
VM (intra- or inter-region), VM-to-IDC, and VM-to-Internet
traffic [48, 53, 55]. Middleboxes provide network functions
like address translation, load balancing, and traffic encryp-
tion/decryption [14, 22, 51, 54, 71, 75].
1Here, "vSwitch" denotes a tenant-visible logical entity for dividing
a VPC into subnets, distinct from the hypervisor vSwitch ( e.g., Open
vSwitch [56]) used to implement cloud network infrastructure.
510    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association
--- Page 4 ---
Original packetOuter MAC/IP/UDP headerVXLANheaderOriginal packet
VNIReservedReservedVXLAN FlagsTablesVXLAN routingVM-server mapping …DecapsulationEncapsulationFigure 2: The architecture of public cloud networks (exemplified with VXLAN as
the overlay protocol).
Private WANHeartbeatfor health checkFigure 3: An example of networking SLA
monitoring for a gaming company.
2.2 Cloud Network Reliability
Network downtime amplification at tenant applications.
As cloud computing evolves, its elasticity and cost benefits has
become widely recognized. Latency-sensitive applications
like online gaming, financial trading, and video conferencing
are moving to public clouds. For backup, data privacy, latency
optimization, and regulatory compliance, many tenants adopt
multi-site deployments, where workloads communicate both
within IDCs and across WANs. As a CSP, we observe that
tenant-level failure recovery strategies are often uncoordi-
nated with the provider’s infrastructure. As a result, transient
network quality degradation can sometimes be amplified at
the application layer, severely impacting user experience.
For example, to reduce latency for global players, a gaming
company deploys game servers across multiple Alibaba Cloud
regions while storing player data in local IDCs for privacy
(Fig. 3). The game architecture leverages heartbeat-based
monitoring to track server health and uses a primary-backup
failover strategy to maintain service continuity. During an
18s cross-region network outage caused by a faulty switch
card, three consecutive heartbeat timeouts led the tenant to
misidentify its remote server as failed, subsequently trigger-
ing a failover. Client connections were forcibly interrupted
and reconnected to the backup server during the failover, caus-
ing sharp latency spikes and gameplay stutters. Full service
recovery took 11min (much longer than the network down-
time), during which over 2,000 players were disconnected
due to lost or unsynchronized state, resulting in noticeable
operational and reputational impact for the company.
Another example arises in intra-region financial trading,
which relies on Aeron, a high-performance transport frame-
work over UDP with userspace ring buffers and NAK-based
reliability [1]. When a transient link jitter caused intermittent
packet losses for 5 s, Aeron’s sending buffer quickly filled
up, forcing the sender to pause transmissions while trigger-
ing NAK-driven retransmissions. The retransmission process
scans the ring buffer to locate and resend lost packets. Given
Q1Q2Q3Q4Q5
Quarter0255075100125150175Time(normalized)
Detection
Recovery
1 2 4 816 32 64
Ratio of r_time to d_time0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDF
(16, 0.8092)
(1, 0.1381)Figure 4: Statistical results of network failure detection time
(d_time) and recovery time ( r_time) in Alibaba Cloud.3
the high traffic volume, over 70K packets were lost within 5 s,
resulting in repeated pauses, buffer scans, and retransmissions.
New packets could not be sent in time and accumulated at
the sender, inflating the delivery latency to nearly 1 min. Such
latency amplification imposes tangible financial loss.
Network telemetry fails in prompt failure recovery. Rapid
failure detection and recovery are critical to both CSPs and
tenants. However, device and link failures are unavoidable
in large-scale networks [29 –32]. To reduce their impact on
tenants, we develop multiple network telemetry systems like
VTrace [24] and Zoonet [81] to quickly detect and localize
network anomalies. However, they still rely on OCEs to man-
ually diagnose and repair failures given the complex root
causes, which usually involve interactions among multiple
teams. Sometimes, when the root cause is related to external
infrastructure like leased dedicated lines from Internet Service
Providers (ISPs), the repair process can take nearly 2 hours.
We investigate the detection time ( d_time ) and recovery
time ( r_time ) of 150+ failures in our cloud from 2022-01-01
to 2023-03-31. As shown in Fig. 4 (a), within each quarter,
the average r_time is more than 3x the average d_time , with
the peak reaching 10x. By analyzing the outliers in the box-
plot, we find that unusually long d_time orr_time is mainly
due to root causes like ISP network failures and switch card
3To comply with company policies, data is normalized with mind_time
as the unit.
USENIX Association 23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    511
--- Page 5 ---
exceptions (detailed in Tab A1). We further compute the ratio
ofr_time tod_time for each failure and plot a CDF in Fig. 4
(b). We observe that less than 14% of failures are resolved
promptly after their detection ( i.e.,r_time ≤d_time ), while
about 20% of failures have long r_time exceeding 16x their
d_time . In summary, with existing telemetry solutions, we can
localize failures quickly but cannot ensure timely recovery.
2.3 Network Failure Recovery Solutions
Over the years, numerous approaches have been proposed to
repair path failures. However, we observe notable mismatches
when directly applying them in our cloud.
Global traffic engineering. Traffic engineering recovers
from failures by globally recomputing and rerouting traf-
fic [9,35,59,74]. However, since we deploy a massive number
of devices with millions of route entries, a global route re-
convergence usually takes at least 10 min. Some approaches
partition the network to reduce the failure domain and thus
accelerate route convergence [21, 34, 40 –42]. However, they
typically require modifications to the underlying network ar-
chitecture, such as adding domain SDN controllers.
Local fast reroute. Fast reroute [12, 52] enables local repair
within seconds by redirecting traffic to backup paths. How-
ever, these paths are typically precomputed, which prevents
them from handling unexpected failures. In addition, they
are provisioned with limited capacity to reduce costs, making
them prone to congestion when carrying redirected traffic.
Both factors impede full recovery from network outages [69].
Opportunistic protective reroute. To address the limitations
of fast reroute, Google proposed protective reroute [58, 69],
which modifies the IPv6 Flow Label to exploit ECMP path
diversity for rapid switchover. Some RDMA failure recovery
mechanisms adopt a similar way by modifying the source
port to steer traffic to alternative paths [5, 49, 65]. These solu-
tions, however, are opportunistic trial-and-error: header mod-
ifications may trigger path switching but provide no quality
guarantee of the new path. Besides, modifying certain proto-
col fields heavily depends on underlay device support, e.g.,
Google’s private WAN is entirely IPv6-based and all switches
are upgraded to support ECMP hashing over Flow Label [69].
Programmable ECMP. To mitigate randomness of ECMP,
Tencent proposed programmable ECMP [46], leveraging the
ECMP group capability for precise control over hashing. How-
ever, this method still relies on the underlying device capabil-
ities (ECMP group is supported on many but not all network
devices) and introduces a tight coupling with the hardware.
Resilient overlay routing. Resilient overlay routing improves
end-to-end network reliability by dynamically selecting over-
lay paths to bypass failures, without requiring modifications
to the underlying physical network [11,63,72]. However, they
require deploying additional nodes at the overlay layer to con-
struct alternative paths and rely on highly complex full-mesh
probing to identify the available paths. Besides, overlay paths
may incur detours, leading to suboptimal latency.Tenant-level failure recovery. Due to the limitations of the
above infrastructure-level solutions, tenants are compelled to
build their own failure recovery solutions. A viable mean is to
invest in redundant resources for active/standby replications.
Besides, multi-path transport protocols like MPTCP [70] and
XQUIC [20, 79] improve performance while also enhancing
reliability. However, modifying application logic or protocol
stack is arduous and costly for tenants, incurring extra CapEx
and OpEx. Moreover, as mentioned, tenant-level failure re-
covery strategies are typically uncoordinated with the CSP’s
infrastructure, which may amplify the impact of failures.
3 ZooRoute Overview
3.1 Design Principles
Failure recovery as a cloud-native service transparent to
tenants. Most public cloud tenants lack the expertise or will-
ingness to invest in their own high availability architectures.
A few large tenants build active/standby redundancy at the ap-
plication layer, but without visibility into underlying failures,
their failover often misaligns with the cloud infrastructure,
which in turn amplifies the failure. Given tenants’ high sensi-
tivity to service disruptions [81], we assume the responsibility
of fast failure recovery as a service. The recovery should be
transparent to tenants without modifying their traffic so that
they benefit from the service without perceiving its presence.
Exploit path diversity for reliability while keeping agnostic
to the underlying devices. Multipath connectivity is common
within and across IDCs. ECMP is widely enabled on data cen-
ter switches [76,78] and private WAN routers [35], exploiting
path diversity. Moreover, ISPs also extensively enable multi-
path BGP and ECMP on backbone routers [13,43]. Therefore,
Google’s protective rerouting is indeed an effective way to
leverage path diversity for failure recovery. However, it relies
on the Flow Label as the ECMP hash key, which requires an
IPv6 underlay and switches capable of Flow Label hashing,
resulting in a lengthy rollout due to underlay upgrades [69].
Given the heterogeneity of devices in Alibaba Cloud, we seek
failure recovery without modifying the existing underlay.
Fast and deterministic failure recovery. Given that transient
network failures can be amplified at tenant applications, and
Alibaba Cloud hosts millions of tenants where failures on
aggregation links may have a large blast radius [55], we do
not rely on opportunistic reroute [5, 49, 65, 69]. Instead, we
switch traffic to a deterministically healthy path for recovery.
One failure recovery framework for all cloud network sce-
narios. Public cloud networks host diverse communication
workloads, such as communication between VMs (intra- or
inter-region), VMs and the Internet, VMs and local IDCs, as
shown in Fig. 5. These scenarios involve heterogeneous de-
vices, including x86 servers, P4 switches, FPGA, etc, and face
highly concurrent tenant traffic under resource constraints. We
aim for the failure recovery framework to generically support
all of them, enabling timely end-to-end failure bypass.
512    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association
--- Page 6 ---
VM 2HypervisorVM 1Region ARegion BCloudgatewayHypervisorVM 3
Intra-regionInter-regionVM Hypervisor
Internet
VMVMMiddlebox
IDCRegion A(a)(b)
Figure 5: Typical cloud network scenarios: (a) VM-VM [intra-
/inter-region], (b) VM-Internet and VM-IDC.
srcIPsrcPortdstIPdstPortprotocolOuter 5-tupleSrc
Tenant application
Overlay
ZooRoute
Physical network
DstOuterMAC/IP/UDPHeaderVXLANHeaderInnerMAC/IPHeader
Candidate pathsviasrcPort probingsrcPort : 17Payload
srcPort : 24 
Figure 6: Key idea of ZooRoute.
3.2 Architecture and Workflow
Based on the above design principles, we propose ZooRoute,
a fast failure recovery service in Alibaba Cloud.
Tunnel header modification for path switching. Like pro-
tective rerouting, ZooRoute modifies packet headers to trigger
ECMP hashing in the underlying devices, thereby bypassing
network failures. Unlike prior work, this modification occurs
at the CSP-owned overlay layer, making it transparent to ten-
ants and agnostic to underlay devices. As shown in Fig. 6,
when traffic exits a tenant VM towards the physical network,
the VTEP encapsulates it with a VXLAN outer header. The
outer source and destination IPs correspond to the servers
hosting the source and destination VMs, and the outer destina-
tion port is set to 4789 according to the VXLAN standard [50].
The outer source port, however, is undefined and can be set
freely. Underlay devices in the physical network are oblivious
to inner or outer headers; they perform ECMP hashing solely
on the outermost 5-tuple, thereby enabling path switching
induced by variations in the outer source port.
Candidate path provisioning for deterministic recovery.
To reduce service disruptions, the key distinction of ZooRoute
from prior work is deterministic rerouting. Since the hyper-
visor can steer flows to different paths by changing the outer
source port, ZooRoute allows the source VTEP to proactively
probe candidate paths (each mapped to a source port) and
track their status in real time. When the active path/port shows
anomalies, traffic is immediately switched to a pre-probed
backup path/port. In practice, ZooRoute conducts round-trip
probing between endpoints: forward probes use source ports
maintained at the source host, while return probes use source
ports maintained at the destination host. A path is deemed un-
available if the RTT exceeds a threshold or a timeout occurs.
SlowPath
FastPathAnalyzer
Priority-based bitmapmatching
Hierarchical indexing Prober
Dynamicfrequencyadjustment
On-demandprobing
AutoresponseVRTVST. . . PathTable_fastdstIPsrcPort1.0.0.1241.0.0.22461.0.0.213……
1. Path Probing
2. Path Recording
3. Path Switching
Packets:regular servicetelemetry requesttelemetry response
Packet-triggered table update
Middleboxsensing
*VRT: VXLAN routing table            *VST: VM-server mapping tablePathTable_slowdstIPsrcPortstatusgroup1.0.0.1124fail11.0.0.124ok11.0.0.1246fail21.0.0.2246ok11.0.0.213ok2…………Figure 7: ZooRoute agent architecture.
Segmented probing to cover diverse scenarios. To cover
different cloud network scenarios, ZooRoute conducts seg-
mented probing instead of end-to-end probing. It probes under
five scenarios with three types of VTEPs, namely, hypervisor
(H), middlebox (M), and cloud gateway (G):
•H-H : between hypervisors within a region.
•H-M : between hypervisors and middleboxes in a region.
•H-G : between hypervisors and cloud gateways in a region.
•M-G : between middleboxes and cloud gateways in a region.
•G-G : between cloud gateways across regions.
Decomposing end-to-end probing into segmented probing
reduces the overhead of maintaining candidate paths and en-
ables scenario-specific optimizations ( e.g., probe frequency,
path storage, stateful vs stateless). By composing segments,
ZooRoute achieves coverage over the entire cloud network.
ZooRoute workflow. We design ZooRoute as a distributed
system, deployed as agents on VTEPs, to enable fast response
and avoid single point of failure. To accommodate heteroge-
neous VTEPs, ZooRoute agent adopts a unified slow/fast-path
architecture. As Fig. 7 shows, the prober, analyzer, and two
path tables jointly monitor network status and maintain avail-
able paths. The slow path handles probing and path updates,
while the fast path utilizes the maintained available paths
to support fast rerouting. ZooRoute operates in three steps:
probing, recording, and switching. The prober periodically
sends telemetry requests to each peer VTEP using different
source ports. The analyzer collects the telemetry responses
and records metadata ( e.g., destination IP, source port, and
health status) in PathTable_slow . Healthy entries are syn-
chronized to PathTable_fast , which is refreshed whenever
PathTable_slow changes. During tenant traffic encapsula-
tion, the VTEP consults not only the VXLAN routing table
and VM-server mapping table to resolve the outer destination
IP, but also the path table to select an available source port.
Moreover, upon receiving telemetry requests, the ZooRoute
agent automatically selects reply paths using PathTable_fast,
eliminating slow-path CPU intervention.
USENIX Association 23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    513
--- Page 7 ---
3.3 Technical Challenges
VTEP CPU overhead of path probing at cloud-scale.
Network-wide telemetry is the basis of path-quality awareness
but is costly at large-scale CSPs. We model the telemetry cost
per VTEP as C= (Nv×Np×f)×cprocess , where Nvis the
number of peer VTEPs to probe, Npis the number of source
ports to probe, fis the probing frequency, and cprocess is the
processing cost of a telemetry request and its response. At
the VTEP level ( Nv), scale is the dominant bottleneck. For in-
stance, Alibaba Cloud regions can contain up to 200k servers.
Probing all peer VTEPs at a high frequency would incur sub-
stantial overhead and impact regular services. At the source
port level ( Np), the choice of which and how many ports to
probe directly affects ZooRoute’s cost and coverage. In prin-
ciple, topology and hashing information could determine the
exact port set that covers all paths to each VTEP, but this is
computationally infeasible given the underlay topology scale
and dynamics. Heuristically inferring the source-port–to–path
mapping via traceroute [37] or In-band Network Telemetry
(INT) [38] is also impractical for production, as traceroute
strains intermediate devices and INT requires ubiquitous hard-
ware support. Therefore, ZooRoute needs to identify the op-
timal target VTEPs, source ports, and probing frequency to
maximize network visibility within a strict cost budget.
Path recording overhead at Tofino-based cloud gateways.
The status of source ports must be recorded to enable one-shot
traffic rerouting to healthy paths. However, large CSPs often
deploy hardware accelerators to improve performance [14,26,
48,51,53,55], whose on-chip memory is typically limited. For
example, Alibaba builds cloud gateways on Tofino [15]. As
a central traffic hub, it must track source port status for tens
of thousands of VTEPs. Yet, given Tofino’s limited on-chip
memory (O(10MB) SRAM/TCAM), maintaining VXLAN
routing and VM-server mapping tables is already challenging,
let alone adding another large candidate path table.
Unlike the relatively infrequent updates to the VXLAN
routing table or VM-server mapping table, network failures
at traffic aggregation points require immediate updates to a
large number of entries on the path table. Our stress tests show
that the maximum throughput from the slow-path CPU to the
programmable ASIC over PCIe is about 10k transactions per
second. Assuming a gateway maintains paths for 50k VTEPs4
and, in the worst case, all Np=32source ports per VTEP must
be updated, the process could take nearly 3 min, during which
tenants’ traffic may be disrupted by stale path information.
Connection disruptions at stateful middleboxes during
path switching. Path switching is vital for fast recovery, but
may disrupt normal transmission and cause packet reordering.
Some packet reordering is acceptable during failures, and
modern kernels plus techniques like reordering buffers [61]
make mild reordering manageable for stateless forwarding
4Production data in our cloud shows that in the largest region, the number
of VTEPs concurrently communicating with a gateway is close to 50k.(see Table A2). Stateful forwarding is more challenging. In
many cloud services ( e.g., NAT, SLB), changing the source
port can break session affinity and trigger connection resets,
adding extra latency. Specifically, for scalability and robust-
ness, large CSPs typically deploy clusters of cloud gateways
or middlebox instances ( e.g., the SLB in Fig. 14) that advertise
a virtual IP (vIP) via a Linux virtual server [77] switch (LVS
switch, LSW) and distribute incoming traffic using ECMP.
As a result, when a flow from srcitovIP jchanges its source
port, it may be redirected to a different middlebox instance.
While this has no impact on stateless forwarding, stateful
services such as SLB will reset the connection because the
corresponding session does not exist on the new instance.
4 Path Probing
4.1 On-Demand Probing
Active VTEP probing. Full-mesh telemetry is redundant due
to traffic sparsity. In Alibaba Cloud, over 99% of VTEPs com-
municate with less than 25% of their regional counterparts.
Consequently, ZooRoute initiates a probing task on VTEP i
to VTEP jonly if there is tenant traffic between them, which
can be detected at VTEP iduring packet encapsulation, and
the task will be released after a duration of inactivity.
Active source port probing. ZooRoute supports two prob-
ing modes: full-probe and partial-probe. In full-probe mode,
ZooRoute randomly probes Npsource ports, starting from
10,000 to avoid conflicts with well-known or reserved ports.
The value of Npis tuned based on the CPU usage distribution
of the destination VTEP (detailed in Fig. A2). Empirically,
ZooRoute set Np=32to balance telemetry cost and the risk
of traffic concentrating on a single underlay path. For cross-
region scenarios, where cloud gateways handle higher traffic
volumes, we increase Npto 64 to ensure sufficient entropy.
Besides, to avoid path scarcity, if more than half of the ports
on a VTEP are unavailable, ZooRoute selects an additional
Npports for probing. In partial-probe mode, ZooRoute only
probes ports actively carrying tenant traffic. By default, intra-
region traffic uses partial probing to minimize cost; however,
upon detecting anomalies ( i.e., when the path associated with
the current source port becomes unhealthy), it dynamically
switches to full probing to rapidly identify healthy alterna-
tives. Conversely, inter-region (G-G) traffic always employs
full probing due to the smaller number of endpoints and the
larger failure blast radius as traffic aggregates at gateways.
Source port learning in stateful forwarding. ZooRoute con-
ducts round-trip probing to to verify bidirectional path avail-
ability. Namely, while source VTEPs actively select source
ports, destination VTEPs must also maintain their own source
port lists to direct return traffic. However, middleboxes do not
initiate traffic themselves, which makes the active probing
unnecessary. ZooRoute thus implements a passive learning
mechanism for these middleboxes. As shown in Fig. 8, since
stateful middleboxes maintain session tables that record the
514    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association
--- Page 8 ---
10.0.0.1Session TableOuter srcIPOuter srcPortInnerdstIPInnerdstport…10.0.0.1124192.0.0.38001…10.0.0.220192.0.0.18080…SLB1srcPort:124srcPort:124Figure 8: Source port learning in stateful
forwarding scenarios like SLB.
ccCPU Monitoring
SrciDstjdIP1dIPjdIPNv……Rate limit12CTL: def/bp3Adjust windowTokens
CPU MonitoringFigure 9: CPU-based frequency adjustment
for source and destination VTEPs.
36.08%
63.92%# of failures
d_time r_time0102030Time (normalized)
intra-AZ
inter-AZFigure 10: Scenario distribution of net-
work failures in Alibaba Cloud.
outer header information of incoming packets, it can passively
select return paths using the source ports employed by peers.
For example, when server 10.0.0.1 accesses backend service
192.0.0.3 via a load balancing service (SLB 1), the session
table of SLB 1 records both the inner 5-tuple, outer source IP
and source port 124. Later, when SLB 1 sends packets back
to 10.0.0.1, it queries the session table and mirrors 124 as its
own outer source port for an available path. If that return path
fails, the source VTEP can correctly infer the incident due to
the absence of telemetry responses and proactively switches
to another source port; SLB 1 subsequently adopts this new
port for its responses, effectively bypassing the failure. This
design enables middleboxes to rely on the existing session
table, eliminating the need for active probing.
4.2 Dynamic Frequency Adjustment
CPU is the primary bottleneck for VTEPs during path probing.
As shown in Fig. 9, ZooRoute monitors CPU utilization per
VTEP, which reflects traffic processing load [47], and uses a
per-destination packet sending window at the source to adapt
probing frequency. The source-side cost mainly comes from
constructing and sending telemetry requests. To avoid impact-
ing regular service, ZooRoute applies exponential backoff
when more than 7 of the last 10 CPU utilization samples ex-
ceed 80% and the probing rate ≥30kpps. Conversely, if all of
the last 10 samples are below 70%, it restores the default rate
of one probe per second per source port. To stay effective un-
der reduced frequency, ZooRoute prioritizes telemetry tasks.
Fig. 10 summarizes incidents in Alibaba Cloud from 2022.1.1
to 2023.3.31, showing that ~64% of failures affect inter-AZ
communication, with outages lasting more than twice as long
as intra-AZ failures. Therefore, when under tight resources,
ZooRoute prioritizes inter-AZ probes, which are identified
via the TTL in negotiation response packets.
At the destination, concurrent probe packets from multiple
sources may converge into an incast [17], creating processing
pressure. ZooRoute employs a token bucket for rate limit-
ing and signals the sources to adjust its sending window W
through the CTL field in telemetry response packets (Fig. 9).
Specifically, the destination server dstjadjusts the maximum
limit of its token bucket based on CPU utilization. By default,
it responds to each source with CTL =de f. When tokens are
insufficient, the response carries a backpressure signal (CTLAlgorithm 1: Telemetry frequency adjustment at the
source VETP with CTL.
Require: CTL.value, Wj,Nbp,Nl
1:ifCLT.value == defthen
2: Wj=Wj+1
3: return probe dstjwith sending window Wj
4:else if CLT.value == bpthen
5: Wj=Wj−Nbp−Nl
6: ifWj>0then
7: return probe dstjwith sending window Wj
8: else
9: return probe dstjevery 2(1−Wj)seconds
10: end if
11:end if
=bp), instructing source srcito lower its telemetry frequency.
As shown in Algorithm 1, srciby default increases Wjaddi-
tively. Upon receiving backpressure signals, srcireduces Wj
based on the number of responses carrying CTL =bp(Nbp)
and the number of lost telemetry requests ( Nl).
5 Path Recording
5.1 Path Table Compression
To compress path table at production scale, ZooRoute does
not store a set of complete source ports (16-bit each) for
each Dst VTEP. Intead, it designates a base source port ( e.g.,
10,000) and uses a bitmap to represent the set of source ports
for each Dst VTEP, where "1" indicates available and "0"
indiates unavailable (Fig. 11). While this data structure suf-
fices for x86-based VTEPs, Tofino-based gateways face strict
limits on programmability and on-chip memory. Therefore,
we further tailor scenario-specific compression based on peer
VTEP scales: Priority-based Bitmap Matching (PBM) handles
pipeline constraints of Tofino in cross-region (G-G) scenarios,
while Hierarchical Indexing (HI) minimizes memory footprint
for massive intra-region (H-G) endpoints.
Priority-based bitmap matching (PBM). After compressing
the path table, ZooRoute selects an available path by randomly
choosing a source port whose bit is "1" in the destination IP’s
bitmap. Implementing such random selection on Tofino is non-
trivial because the pipeline lacks loop support. To address this,
ZooRoute conducts random port selection using the packet’s
inner 5-tuple hashing and priority-based bitmap matching.
Specifically, we construct a priority table with Npgroups, each
containing Npmasks whose length equals the bitmap ( i.e.,Np).
USENIX Association 23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    515
--- Page 9 ---
1111…1011…BitmapPrioritytabledstIP1 dstIP2 dstIP3dstIPidstIP𝑁!  0011…1010…𝑁! bit…Group1****1****1****1G10123G23012G32301G41230……...…...𝑁! bitN!Figure 11: Path table compression with
PBM for cross-region (G-G) scenarios.
dstIP iProbed srcPorts…Null…00010(srcPort 2)00001 (srcPort 1) 𝑙𝑜𝑔!𝑁" bit…𝑁"𝑀srcPort  1srcPort  2 …srcPort  3 srcPort  9srcPort 10 …srcPort 11 𝑁"
Figure 12: Path table compression with
HI for intra-region (H-G) scenarios.
CPU
keyvaluedstIPjaddrjHashTableRegisterHashTable
keyvaluedstIPj+indexksrcPortkProgrammable ASIC
CPUProgrammable ASICPCIe(a)
srcPortisrcPortjsrcPortk
Update delivered by packet
Endflag12(b)3Figure 13: Path table updates delivered via
(a) PCIe or (b) packets.
As Fig. 11 shows, with Np=4, a group holds masks "1***",
"*1**", "**1*", and "***1". Within each group, masks are
assigned priorities via circular shifts, with 0 as the highest
priority. This table is shared across all destination IPs. When
sending a packet, ZooRoute hashes its inner 5-tuple to a group,
and matches masks against the destination’s bitmap in priority
order. The source port of the first matching mask is then
selected for VXLAN encapsulation.
For example, consider dstIP 2in Fig. 11, where ZooRoute
probes source ports 10001-10004, yielding a bitmap of "1011"
(i.e., port 10002 is unavailable). A packet hashed by its inner
5-tuple to group G3 finds that the top-priority mask "**1*"
successfully matches the bitmap. Consequently, it uses source
port 10003 for VXLAN encapsulation. If source port 10003
fails, the bitmap becomes "1001", and mask "**1*" no longer
matches. ZooRoute then scans G3 in priority order, selecting
the next matching mask "***1", so the packet uses source
port 10004 for VXLAN encapsulation at this time.
Hierarchical indexing (HI). In intra-region (H-G) scenarios,
gateways serve as traffic hubs and must track the availability
of source ports for tens of thousands of VTEPs in the region.
ZooRoute introduces hierarchical indexing for further path
table compression. As shown in Fig. 12, instead of recording
status for all the probed Npsource ports of dstIP i, ZooRoute
groups every Msource ports into one entry in the path table,
reducing entries to Np/M. In implementation, the Msource
ports are selected at a fixed stride of Np/M. For example, in
Fig. 12, with Np=32andM=4, source port 1, 9, 17...are
grouped together. The table entries are filled as follows:
•If all source ports in this group work well, the corresponding
entry will remain empty (as depicted in red).
•If there exist "bad" source ports, the entry will be randomly
filled with a working source port in the same group (as
depicted in green).
•If all source ports are unavailable, a working one from other
groups will be randomly chosen (as depicted in blue).
When encapsulating a packet, ZooRoute computes the path
table index for a group of source ports. If the entry is empty, it
randomly selects one of the Msource ports; otherwise, it uses
the recorded one. In theory, HI requires O(M
log2Np)times less
memory than PBM. The tradeoff is that in the worst case ( i.e.,
exactly one "bad" port in each group), HI exposes M−1fewer
usable ports than PBM. Such corner cases are rare. Besides,
compared to cross-region G-G traffic, intra-region H-G trafficis lighter, thus less prone to polarization. In practice, we set
M=8 to balance memory efficiency and polarization risk.
5.2 Packet-Triggered Table Updates
Failures at traffic aggregation points can trigger massive path
updates. A naive design stores destination IPs and their source
ports as {key, value} pairs in on-chip hash table, relying on
the CPU to push updates via PCIe (Fig. 13(a)), but PCIe
bandwidth limits update concurrency. ZooRoute instead uses
an in-network update mechanism. As shown in Fig. 13(b), it
combines hash tables and registers on Tofino: registers store
frequently changing source port status (read/write at line rate
during packet processing), while the relatively static mapping
from destination IPs to registers resides in the hash table.
When a path state change is detected, the CPU sends negoti-
ation packets carrying special PKT markers (see Appendix A)
(1⃝). Upon reception, Tofino extracts the destination IP and
source port fields from the packet header and updates the cor-
responding entry ( 2⃝). Since Tofino supports Tbps throughput,
the bottleneck now shifts to the CPU’s ability to construct and
send these packets. To further accelerate updates and reduce
bandwidth, ZooRoute batches multiple updates per packet.
After each update, Tofino invalidates the processed header and
re-injects the packet via loopback to handle the next update,
repeating until an EndFlag is reached ( 3⃝).
6 Path Switching
Changing the source port can rehash flows to a different mid-
dlebox instance, causing session loss and connection resets.
A strawman mitigation is to synchronize session state across
instances. For example, Alibaba Cloud syncs all sessions ev-
ery 30 sand incrementally syncs new connections after the
three-way handshake. While covering most cases, this method
misses traffic with incomplete handshakes or unsynchronized
sessions. ZooRoute arms stateful forwarding with middlebox
sensing. By adding a "Backend ID" field in probe packets (see
Appendix A), it ensures traffic can be steered to the original
middlebox instance after a path switch. Specifically, when a
middlebox returns a telemetry response, it fills this field with
its MAC address. The source VTEP then groups source ports
by Backend ID. As Fig. 14 illustrates, source ports 24, 124,
and 12 are grouped together since they receive responses from
the same middlebox instance (same Backend ID).
516    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association
--- Page 10 ---
Path Table_slowdIPsrcPortgroupvIP1241 (LVS1)vIP1502 (LVS2)vIP1512 (LVS2)vIP11241 (LVS1)vIP1121 (LVS1)vIP11352 (LVS2)LVS 2
ResetLVS 1
SLB
srci
ZooRouteServers
DCNLSWactiveLSWstandbyvIPjFigure 14: Path switching in stateful forwarding scenarios
like SLB w/wo middlebox sensing.
Use 𝑠𝑟𝑐𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡! in 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝!Wait to be choose until current 𝑠𝑟𝑐𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡 is downProb𝑠𝑟𝑐𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑠	in useRandomly use 𝑠𝑟𝑐𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡" in 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝!Randomly choose available 𝑠𝑟𝑐𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡# from other groups𝑠𝑟𝑐𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡! available ?𝑠𝑟𝑐𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡! state change?stateup→downYesYesNoNoAvailable 𝑠𝑟𝑐𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑠 in 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝!? YesYes
Figure 15: Process of path switching with middlebox sensing.
Fig. 15 illustrates the strategy. For new connections travers-
ing stateful middleboxes, the source VTEP randomly selects
one source port per group to balance load across instances. If
an in-use port srcPort ibecomes unavailable, ZooRoute pref-
erentially replaces it with srcPort jin the same group Group i,
keeping traffic on the same instance to avoid connection re-
sets. If all ports in Group iare unavailable, likely indicating an
instance failure, it selects a port from a different group, rerout-
ing affected traffic to another instance. For stability, ZooRoute
changes paths only when the currently used source ports fail;
it does not proactively switch paths when group membership
changes or a previously unavailable port recovers. Moreover,
since middlebox sensing is incompatible with path table com-
pression, ZooRoute skips compression for stateful middlebox
vIPs. As such vIPs are few, the memory impact is negligible.
7 Evaluation
To evaluate the effectiveness of ZooRoute’s optimizations in
path probing, recording, and switching, we collect data from
three representative regions of varying sizes: a large region
wtih 100 k+VTEPs, a medium region with 50 k+VTEPs, and a
small region with 10 k+VTEPs. For now, ZooRoute has been
deployed in production for 26 months, covering diverse cloud
networking scenarios across 33 regions in Alibaba Cloud. We
report ZooRoute’s online overheads and performance, and
illustrate its effects and limitations with three typical cases.
7.1 Evaluation of Optimizations
Costs in path probing. We measure telemetry packet counts
over a 30- minperiod in the three regions. Taking full-mesh
probing with Np=32as the baseline, Fig. 16 (a) shows the
Optimizations:A: Active IPB: ActivesrcPortC: srcPort learning(a) Total number(b) Max. number per VTEPFigure 16: Remaining probing packets after optimizations: (a)
total and (b) per-VTEP Max. count relative to full-mesh.
proportion of total telemetry packets remaining after a series
of optimizations. Fig. 16 (b) highlights the reduction in the
maximum number of packets per VTEP, shown as a ratio to
the maximum count observed in the full-mesh baseline. Our
results show that active IP probing reduces telemetry costs by
60%~70%. This strategy is more effective in larger regions,
likely due to a sparser communication matrix among VTEPs.
On this basis, active source port probing further brings the
overall cost down to around 5%, with the exact reduction
depending on the specific traffic characteristics of each region.
While the source port learning mechanism has a negligible
impact on overall regional costs, it is particularly beneficial
for stateful middleboxes, which typically communicate with
a high volume of VTEPs. By directly exempting them from
path probing, this strategy lowers the VTEP-level maximum
telemetry packet count in their regions.
Moreover, our monitoring of VTEP’s CPU usage in Alibaba
Cloud shows that less than 1 ‰of VTEPs have their 99th
percentile (P99) CPU utilization exceeding 80% per day. The
dynamic frequency adjustment mechanism is thus a last-resort
solution, triggered only in extreme cases to prevent resource
preemption, with minimal impact on ZooRoute’s agility.
Path table storage and updates. We set the baseline as stor-
ing one available source port in every entry of P4 gateway’s
built-in hash table. Because this design is infeasible to com-
pile at production scale, it serves only as a theoretical refer-
ence. Fig. 17 depicts the memory usage of ZooRoute’s path
table after compression with PBM or HI, shown as a ratio
to the baseline. PBM cuts memory usage by ~15x, while HI
achieves ~25x compression. Discrepancies across regions re-
sult from varying fractions of vIPs associated with stateful
middleboxes. Entries for such vIPs remain uncompressed to
retain grouping information.
Production data shows that, in the largest region, a single
gateway concurrently serves nearly 50k VTEPs. We therefore
emulate a substantial outage, where each of the 50k VTEPs
must update state for Np=32 source ports. Fig. 18 presents the
completion time under different strategies. Compared to PCIe
transmission, packet-triggered messaging accelerates table
updates by three orders of magnitude. Besides, when using
PCIe, HI takes ~5x longer than PBM, because HI needs to
record one available source port for every group. Nevertheless,
with packet-triggered messaging, this gap becomes negligible.
USENIX Association 23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    517
--- Page 11 ---
Large Medium Small
Region size0255075100Memory ratio (%)naive
PBM
HIFigure 17: Path table memory usage after
compression (relative to naive baseline).
PCIe Packet-triggered
Strategy10−2100102Completion time (s)naive
PMB
HIFigure 18: Path table update completion
time under different messaging strategies.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
Times of repetition0.000.250.500.751.00CDF
wo
wFigure 19: Cumulative distribution of re-
peat times w/wo middlebox sensing.
01234567
Days0.020.030.040.050.06Usage ratio
CPU
Memory
01234567
Days0.020.040.060.080.10Usage ratio
CPU
Memory
8.08.18.28.38.48.58.6×10−4
Bandwidth
9.29.39.49.59.69.79.8×10−6
Bandwidth
Figure 20: P99 resource usage of ZooRoute on x86 servers
(left) and Tofino-based gateways (right).
0 5 10 15 20 25
Months5060708090100Reduced outage time (%)
0 10 20 30
Regions5060708090100Reduced outage time (%)Figure 21: Outage time reduced by ZooRoute over months
(left) and across regions (right).
Stateful forwarding with middlebox sensing. We deploy an
SLB with vIP1(running on three LVS instances) in Alibaba
Cloud, and set up a basic HTTP service on the backend VM.
A client VM issues requests to vIP1using CURL [2]; upon
failures it retries until success with a cap of 10 times. We
repeat this process for 1,000 rounds. To emulate ZooRoute’s
behavior during failures, the hypervisor reassigns different
source ports every three packets within the same flow. Fig. 19
plots the CDF of per-round retry counts, with and without
middlebox sensing. It is evident that, originally, about 25%
of rounds hit the retry cap and still fail; with middlebox sens-
ing, all requests succeed on the first attempt. This is because
after changing source ports, packets of the same flow may be
steered to different LVS nodes that lack the corresponding
session states, thus unable to complete the TCP three-way
handshake and establish a connection. The middlebox sens-
ing strategy confines changes within the set of source ports
mapped to the same LVS, preserving session continuity.
7.2 Overhead of ZooRoute
We assess ZooRoute’s online overhead with the resource con-
sumption across VTEPs in the Large region. Fig. 20 reports a
week of daily P99 resource usage on x86-based servers and on
Tofino-based gateways. On servers, ZooRoute uses 2%~3%
CPU, 3% memory, and <0.085% NIC bandwidth. Memory
usage appears fixed because we pre-allocate ZooRoute’s
memory to its maximum footprint to avoid interference with
tenant workloads. Besides, with dynamic frequency control,
ZooRoute backs off under resource pressure and does not
compete with regular services. On Tofino-based gateways,
ZooRoute consumes <7.5% CPU, 3% on-chip SRAM, and
<0.001% of bandwidth. The seemingly higher CPU stems
from the fact that packets are directly processed by Tofino,Table 1: Top 3 failure types mitigate by ZooRoute.
Root causes Scene Avg. RT Avg. RR
Jitter in long-haul link inter-region 7.47s 84.67%
Switch card or port anomaly intra-region 139.52 s 93.12%
Fiber issue or cutover in ISP inter-region 295.33 s 98.60%
*RT: reduced outage time; RR: outage-time reduction ratio.
while the CPU only performs auxiliary tasks like configura-
tion management. Overall, these overheads are modest and
acceptable for large CSPs, especially compared to the reputa-
tional and revenue risks of SLA violations.
7.3 Online Performance
ZooRoute has been deployed in Alibaba Cloud for 26 months.
Over this period, 46.6% of failures are intra-region, mainly
caused by device faults like switch port anomalies, while the
remaining are inter-region, mostly due to link issues like long-
haul link jitter. To quantify the benefit, we derive a baseline
outage time from ZooRoute’s probing of faulty source ports,
and measure the actual end-to-end impact using Zoonet [81],
a proactive overlay telemetry system. By comparing their
loss windows, we find that ZooRoute cumulatively reduces
93.19% of outage time, masking 98.21% of failures from ten-
ants awareness. As shown in Fig. 21, ZooRoute consistently
provides large outage reductions, with monthly ratios above
75% and regional ratios exceed 80%. Variations are caused
by differences in failure types and root causes.
We group incidents by root cause and report the Top 3 types
with the largest cumulative outage reductions by ZooRoute
in Table 1. i) Transient jitters on long-haul links are common,
usually last 5s~15s and harm latency-sensitive applications
like live streaming and financial trading. ZooRoute bypasses
them within 1 s, typically without tenant packet loss. ii) Switch
card/port anomalies occur sometimes, with duration from sec-
518    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association
--- Page 12 ---
123456789101112131415161718
Time (s)020406080100Packet loss ratio (%)78.3%wo wFigure 22: Packet loss w/wo ZooRoute
during a long-hual link jitter.
0 20 40 60 80
Http request01234Completion time (s)Time outwo wFigure 23: HTTP request latency w/wo
ZooRoute during a switch card failure.
1 2 3 4 5 6
Time (min)0102030Packet loss ratio (%)wo wFigure 24: Packet loss w/wo ZooRoute
when two border routers down.
onds to minutes; most are mitigated by ZooRoute within 3 s.
iii) ISP fiber cuts are rarer but can persist for hours and lie
beyond CSP’s control; ZooRoute reduces their impact and fa-
cilitates cross-enterprise coordination. Next, we present three
cases to illustrate ZooRoute’s effectiveness and limitations.
Case 1: Jitters on a long-haul link. A long-haul link between
two regions fluctuated for 12 s. As shown in Fig. 22, the loss
rate of probe packets peaked at 78.3% at the 6th second. With
ZooRoute, tenant traffic was rerouted to a stable link within
1s, with transient loss below 10% before full recovery.
Case 2: Line-card failure on a switch. A line card on a dis-
tribute switch in AZ_A failed for 2 min, affecting 67% of inter-
AZ traffic. We compare two VMs that communicated with an
impacted VTEP: VM1 from AZ_B (without ZooRoute), and
VM2 from AZ_C (with ZooRoute). Fig. 23 plots the comple-
tion time of their HTTP request latency. During the incident,
VM1 experienced repeated retries and timeouts. In contrast,
VM2 saw only a short latency spike due to initial retries and
remained unaffected thereafter.
Case 3: Half of border routers failed. A program bug caused
two of four border routers to fail in sequence. Fig. 24 shows
inter-region packet loss rising to 35% initially and 26% after
2min, lasting 4.5 minwith residuals until 6 min. ZooRoute sub-
stantially reduced loss but could not recover within 3 s. This
is because: i) unstable control/data -plane during ISIS conver-
gence across many ports, triggering frequent re -connections
and inconsistent ECMP hashing; source ports chosen from
historical probes may be steered to defunct paths. ii) A 50%
capacity drop left remaining links near saturation; redirecting
impacted traffic risked exceeding 100% utilization and induc-
ing loss. Making ZooRoute more robust under unstable and
highly utilized networks is a key direction for future work.
8 Experiences
The value of deterministic failover in public clouds. Some
prior work [5, 49, 65, 69] employs opportunistic rerouting to
bypass failures. In contrast, ZooRoute performs determinis-
tic rerouting by shifting traffic to candidate paths that have
been proactively probed and validated as healthy, enabling a
one-shot switchover. This property is crucial in public clouds,
because as illustrated in §2, transient network degradation
can be amplified by applications and harm user experience.
We study the cross-region scenario, where path redundancy is
typically limited. Statistics show that in cross-region failuresover the last six months, the average proportion of remain-
ing available ports on impacted gateways was 79.52%, with
a minimum of 24.22%. Let pdenote the probability that a
randomly chosen port is healthy. Assuming independent port
selection in both directions, the success probability of a bidi-
rectional probe is p2, and the number of retries Tfollows a
geometric distribution with E[T] =1
p2[46]. This yields an
average of 1.58 attempts, with extreme cases requiring 17.05
retries. When the remaining port ratio falls below 70%, more
than two retries are expected. These observations quantify the
long-tail risk and motivate deterministic failover.
Balance sensitivity and stability in path switching. Though
modern kernels and reordering buffers [61] can tolerate mild
packet reordering (see Table A2), minimizing route flapping
is still essential for network stability. We find that switching
paths on a single probe loss is overly aggressive and injects
avoidable churn. ZooRoute therefore applies hysteresis to
filter transient jitter: upon a probe failure on a source port, it
immediately sends a second probe, and marks the port as bad
only if both probes fail. Besides, to handle intermittent packet
loss, ZooRoute further adopts a 3-out-of-5 policy, declaring a
port unhealthy when three of the last five probes fail. Beyond
binary up/down states, ZooRoute uses historical telemetry to
guide path selection. Since our data indicates that recently
recovered ports carry a higher risk of recidivism, ZooRoute
ranks candidate ports by their failure-free duration and favors
those with longer stable histories. To avoid concentrating
traffic on a small set of stable paths, ZooRoute resets these
rankings every 30mins .
ZooRoute is effective for most failures, but not a univer-
sal remedy. ZooRoute targets fast failure response, yet some
anomalies remain outside its scope and require coordination
with other systems: i) Capacity scarcity and routing instabil-
ity.ZooRoute may underperform when the network has little
spare capacity or when routing states are unstable, as shown
in Case 3. In such situations, previously healthy candidates
can quickly become invalid, and rerouting traffic may fur-
ther increase congestion. In practice, ZooRoute reacts within
seconds, serving as an emergency mitigation to reduce im-
mediate tenant impact. Restoring normal service typically
requires Traffic Engineering to recompute paths and rebal-
ance load at a coarser timescale. The two are complementary
and do not conflict. ii) Low-rate probabilistic loss. When
packet loss is rare and random, a small number of probes
USENIX Association 23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    519
--- Page 13 ---
may not reveal the impairment reliably. Detecting such issues
requires more probes or a longer observation window, intro-
ducing a trade-off between detection latency and telemetry
overhead. iii) Endpoint-adjacent faults. ZooRoute is less ef-
fective when the packet loss originates near endpoints, since
underlay path switching cannot eliminate the bottleneck. A
representative example is microburst-induced drops at the RX
side of a server NIC. In these cases, ZooRoute may change
source ports frequently without reducing packet loss. While
this phenomenon occurs daily, it affects only a negligible frac-
tion of VTEPs. Operationally, we treat excessive switching
rates as alarm signals and leverage automated Standard Oper-
ating Procedures (SOPs) alongisde engineers to diagnose and
fix the endpoint issues. iv) Failures inside the VM datapath.
ZooRoute operates at CSP-owned VTEPs and steers traffic
by modifying the outer encapsulation. It does not directly
cover faults within the VM’s own datapath ( e.g., vNIC drops,
queue hangs). Such failures require VM-granularity visibil-
ity and are better addressed by our proactive virtual network
telemetry system Zoonet [81]. In production, ZooRoute and
Zoonet are complementary: ZooRoute minimizes disruption
by fast bypassing faulty paths, while Zoonet supports detec-
tion, diagnosis, tenant impact assessment, and guides repairs
and architectural evolution.
Beyond fast recovery: latency optimization. Beyond failure
recovery, ZooRoute can use the RTTs collected by its probes
to select lower-latency paths under normal operation. Our on-
line measurements show that the P99 latencies among paths
between server pairs is 10-20 µs within the same AZ, 100-
150µs across AZs, and about 20ms across regions (Fig. A3).
Since the first two cases are acceptable for most tenants,
ZooRoute focuses on optimizes inter-region traffic. Specifi-
cally, it preferentially selects the 10% of available source ports
with the lowest RTT and replaces them if their latency contin-
ues to increase for more than 2min . Fig. A4 shows the latency
improvement in the inter-region setting. Going forward, we
will refine source port allocation by combining physical link
utilization metrics, and address clock-synchronization limita-
tions to improve latency estimation using one-way telemetry.
9 Related Work
Traditional approaches. Traditionally, network failures are
handled in reactive ways, where new paths are recomputed at
distributed routers based on routing policies [18, 66], or at an
centralized controller via traffic engineering [34,35,64,73,80].
These processes are lengthy due to route propagation or in-
teractions between the data plane and the controller. As an
improvement, fast reroute [12, 27, 33, 52, 57] relies solely on
the data plane to redirect traffic away from failure-affected lo-
cations. However, the precomputed backup paths are difficult
to cover various kinds of failures in large-scale networks.
Failure recovery at underlay. Some RDMA recovery mech-
anisms modify the source port to steer UDP traffic onto alter-
native paths [5,49,65]. This breaks TCP connections and thuscannot extend to TCP traffic. Meanwhile, directly modify-
ing original traffic is unsuitable in multi-tenant public clouds.
Google’s protective reroute [69] reroutes by modifying the
IPv6 Flow Label, requiring a recent kernel version, an IPv6
underlay, and switch support for Flow Label hashing. Google
notes that it currently works only for TCP and required sub-
stantial underlay upgrades [69]. Moreover, its trial-and-error
nature poses risk to tenant SLAs. Programmable ECMP [46]
can provide controllable hashing but is tightly coupled with
device-specific capabilities. Some advanced traffic engineer-
ing approaches leverage divide-and-conquer to isolate failure
domains and speed up route convergence [21, 34, 40 –42], but
they still require changes to the network architecture. Like-
wise, fine-grained load-balancing mechanisms such as Con-
Weave [62] and PLB [58] also reroute traffic to enhance net-
work quality, yet they suffer from similar constraints—rely
on specialized devices ( i.e., programmable switches or IPv6
underlay) and bound to specific transport protocols. In con-
trast, ZooRoute avoids these pitfalls and achieves device-
independent recovery for all traffic types.
Failure recovery at overlay. CSPs develop systems like
VNET Pingmesh [60], VTrace [24], and Zoonet [81] to moni-
tor virtual networks and diagnose packet loss. However, they
still rely on OCEs for tenant-aware failure repair. Resilient
overlay routing approaches [11, 63, 72] reroute by steering
traffic through overlay anchors to bypass failures. Techni-
cally, they are not mutually exclusive with ZooRoute: while
ZooRoute modifies the outer source port to exploit under-
lay path diversity, they reroute by selecting different tunnel
endpoints by modifying the outer destination IP. Clove [37]
utilizes a hypervisor-based load balancing mechanism with
path probing and source port altering, which we find is also
viable to enhance network reliability. However, Clove was
only evaluated in a small-scale testbed with 32 servers. Be-
sides, its Clove-ECN and Clove-INT modes rely on device-
specific features, hindering production deployment. In con-
trast, ZooRoute builds on standard ECMP and tackles re-
source challenges in diverse cloud network scenarios.
10 Conclusion
We present ZooRoute, Alibaba’s fast failure recovery service
that achieves end-to-end failure bypass within seconds in
large-scale cloud networks. ZooRoute performs candidate
path provisioning and proactive rerouting at the overlay layer
that are transparent to tenants and agnostic to underlay devices.
A range of optimization techniques improve its efficiency in
path probing, recording, and switching to address the chal-
lenges at public cloud scale. Deployed in production for 26
months, ZooRoute has successfully handled various network
failures without tenant awareness.
Acknowledgements. The authors would like to thank the
shepherd Alex C. Snoeren and the anonymous reviewers for
their con-structive comments.
Ethics. This work does not raise any ethical issues.
520    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association
--- Page 14 ---
References
[1]Aeron - the global technology standard for high-throughput,
low-latency, fault-tolerant trading systems. https://aeron.
io/.
[2]Command line tool and library for transferring data with urls.
https://curl.se/ .
[3]Elastic compute service. https://www.alibabacloud.com/
en/product/ecs .
[4]Inc gartner. invest implications: Cloud shift - 2023
through 2027. https://www.gartner.com/en/documents/
4880831 .
[5]Rdma over converged ethernet (roce). https:
//docs.nvidia.com/networking/display/ofed510660/
rdma+over+converged+ethernet+(roce) .
[6]Route tables. https://www.alibabacloud.com/help/en/
vpc/vpc-route-table .
[7]Server load balancer. https://www.alibabacloud.com/en/
product/server-load-balancer .
[8]Vpcs and vswitches. https://www.alibabacloud.com/
help/en/vpc/vpc-and-vswitch .
[9]Sugam Agarwal, Murali Kodialam, and TV Lakshman. Traffic
engineering in software defined networks. In 2013 Proceedings
IEEE INFOCOM , pages 2211–2219. IEEE, 2013.
[10] Mohammad Al-Fares, Alexander Loukissas, and Amin Vah-
dat. A scalable, commodity data center network architecture.
ACM SIGCOMM computer communication review , 38(4):63–
74, 2008.
[11] David Andersen, Hari Balakrishnan, Frans Kaashoek, and
Robert Morris. Resilient overlay networks. In Proceedings of
the eighteenth ACM symposium on Operating systems princi-
ples, pages 131–145, 2001.
[12] Alia Atlas and Alex Zinin. Basic specification for ip fast
reroute: Loop-free alternates. Technical report, 2008.
[13] Brice Augustin, Timur Friedman, and Renata Teixeira. Measur-
ing multipath routing in the internet. IEEE/ACM Transactions
on Networking , 19(3):830–840, 2010.
[14] Deepak Bansal, Gerald DeGrace, Rishabh Tewari, Michal Zyg-
munt, James Grantham, Silvano Gai, Mario Baldi, Krishna
Doddapaneni, Arun Selvarajan, Arunkumar Arumugam, et al.
Disaggregating stateful network functions. In 20th USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
(NSDI 23) , pages 1469–1487, 2023.
[15] Pat Bosshart, Dan Daly, Glen Gibb, Martin Izzard, Nick McK-
eown, Jennifer Rexford, Cole Schlesinger, Dan Talayco, Amin
Vahdat, George Varghese, et al. P4: Programming protocol-
independent packet processors. ACM SIGCOMM Computer
Communication Review , 44(3):87–95, 2014.
[16] Yasmina Bouizem, Nikos Parlavantzas, Djawida Dib, and
Christine Morin. Active-standby for high-availability in faas.
InProceedings of the 2020 Sixth International Workshop on
Serverless Computing , pages 31–36, 2020.
[17] Yanpei Chen, Rean Griffith, Junda Liu, Randy H Katz, and
Anthony D Joseph. Understanding tcp incast throughput col-
lapse in datacenter networks. In Proceedings of the 1st ACMworkshop on Research on enterprise networking , pages 73–82,
2009.
[18] Pei-chun Cheng, Xin Zhao, Beichuan Zhang, and Lixia Zhang.
Longitudinal study of bgp monitor session failures. ACM
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review , 40(2):34–42,
2010.
[19] Michael Dalton, David Schultz, Jacob Adriaens, Ahsan Are-
fin, Anshuman Gupta, Brian Fahs, Dima Rubinstein, En-
rique Cauich Zermeno, Erik Rubow, James Alexander Docauer,
et al. Andromeda: Performance, isolation, and velocity at scale
in cloud network virtualization. In 15th USENIX symposium
on networked systems design and implementation (NSDI 18) ,
pages 373–387, 2018.
[20] Quentin De Coninck and Olivier Bonaventure. Multipath quic:
Design and evaluation. In Proceedings of the 13th interna-
tional conference on emerging networking experiments and
technologies , pages 160–166, 2017.
[21] Marek Denis, Yuanjun Yao, Ashley Hatch, Qin Zhang,
Chiun Lin Lim, Shuqiang Zhang, Kyle Sugrue, Henry Kwok,
Mikel Jimenez Fernandez, Petr Lapukhov, et al. Ebb: Reliable
and evolvable express backbone network in meta. In Proceed-
ings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2023 Conference , pages 346–359,
2023.
[22] Daniel E Eisenbud, Cheng Yi, Carlo Contavalli, Cody Smith,
Roman Kononov, Eric Mann-Hielscher, Ardas Cilingiroglu,
Bin Cheyney, Wentao Shang, and Jinnah Dylan Hosein. Ma-
glev: A fast and reliable software network load balancer. In
Nsdi, volume 16, pages 523–535, 2016.
[23] U. Elzur F. Maino, L. Kreeger. Generic protocol extension for
vxlan (vxlan-gpe). https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-
nvo3-vxlan-gpe-12.html.
[24] Chongrong Fang, Haoyu Liu, Mao Miao, Jie Ye, Lei Wang,
Wansheng Zhang, Daxiang Kang, Biao Lyv, Peng Cheng, and
Jiming Chen. Vtrace: Automatic diagnostic system for persis-
tent packet loss in cloud-scale overlay network. In Proceedings
of the Annual conference of the ACM Special Interest Group
on Data Communication on the applications, technologies, ar-
chitectures, and protocols for computer communication , pages
31–43, 2020.
[25] Daniel Firestone. {VFP}: A virtual switch platform for host
{SDN}in the public cloud. In 14th USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 17) ,
pages 315–328, 2017.
[26] Daniel Firestone, Andrew Putnam, Sambhrama Mundkur,
Derek Chiou, Alireza Dabagh, Mike Andrewartha, Hari
Angepat, Vivek Bhanu, Adrian Caulfield, Eric Chung, et al.
Azure accelerated networking: {SmartNICs }in the public
cloud. In 15th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (NSDI 18) , pages 51–66, 2018.
[27] Klaus-Tycho Foerster, Yvonne-Anne Pignolet, Stefan Schmid,
and Gilles Tredan. Casa: congestion and stretch aware static
fast rerouting. In IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Conference on
Computer Communications , pages 469–477. IEEE, 2019.
[28] Pankaj Garg and Y Wang. Nvgre: Network virtualization using
generic routing encapsulation. Technical report, 2015.
USENIX Association 23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    521
--- Page 15 ---
[29] Supriyo Ghosh, Manish Shetty, Chetan Bansal, and Suman
Nath. How to fight production incidents? an empirical study
on a large-scale cloud service. In Proceedings of the 13th
Symposium on Cloud Computing , pages 126–141, 2022.
[30] Phillipa Gill, Navendu Jain, and Nachiappan Nagappan. Un-
derstanding network failures in data centers: measurement,
analysis, and implications. In Proceedings of the ACM SIG-
COMM 2011 Conference , pages 350–361, 2011.
[31] Chuanxiong Guo, Lihua Yuan, Dong Xiang, Yingnong Dang,
Ray Huang, Dave Maltz, Zhaoyi Liu, Vin Wang, Bin Pang, Hua
Chen, et al. Pingmesh: A large-scale system for data center
network latency measurement and analysis. In Proceedings of
the 2015 ACM Conference on Special Interest Group on Data
Communication , pages 139–152, 2015.
[32] Shixian Guo, Kefei Liu, Yulin Lai, Yangyang Bai, Ziwei Zhao,
Songlin Liu, Jianghang Ning, Gen Li, Jianwei Hu, Yongbin
Dong, et al. Bytetracker: An agentless and real-time path-
aware network probing system. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGCOMM 2025 Conference , pages 541–553, 2025.
[33] Thomas Holterbach, Stefano Vissicchio, Alberto Dainotti, and
Laurent Vanbever. Swift: Predictive fast reroute. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on
Data Communication , pages 460–473, 2017.
[34] Chi-Yao Hong, Subhasree Mandal, Mohammad Al-Fares, Min
Zhu, Richard Alimi, Kondapa Naidu B, Chandan Bhagat,
Sourabh Jain, Jay Kaimal, Shiyu Liang, et al. B4 and after:
managing hierarchy, partitioning, and asymmetry for availabil-
ity and scale in google’s software-defined wan. In Proceedings
of the 2018 Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on
Data Communication , pages 74–87, 2018.
[35] Sushant Jain, Alok Kumar, Subhasree Mandal, Joon Ong, Leon
Poutievski, Arjun Singh, Subbaiah Venkata, Jim Wanderer, Jun-
lan Zhou, Min Zhu, et al. B4: Experience with a globally-
deployed software defined wan. ACM SIGCOMM Computer
Communication Review , 43(4):3–14, 2013.
[36] Gueyoung Jung, Parisa Rahimzadeh, Zhang Liu, Sangtae Ha,
Kaustubh Joshi, and Matti Hiltunen. Virtual redundancy for
active-standby cloud applications. In IEEE INFOCOM 2018-
IEEE conference on computer communications , pages 1916–
1924. IEEE, 2018.
[37] Naga Katta, Aditi Ghag, Mukesh Hira, Isaac Keslassy, Aran
Bergman, Changhoon Kim, and Jennifer Rexford. Clove:
Congestion-aware load balancing at the virtual edge. In Pro-
ceedings of the 13th International Conference on emerging
Networking EXperiments and Technologies , pages 323–335,
2017.
[38] Naga Katta, Mukesh Hira, Changhoon Kim, Anirudh Sivara-
man, and Jennifer Rexford. Hula: Scalable load balancing
using programmable data planes. In Proceedings of the Sym-
posium on SDN Research , pages 1–12, 2016.
[39] Teemu Koponen, Keith Amidon, Peter Balland, Martín Casado,
Anupam Chanda, Bryan Fulton, Igor Ganichev, Jesse Gross,
Paul Ingram, Ethan Jackson, et al. Network virtualization in
multi-tenant datacenters. In 11th USENIX symposium on net-
worked systems design and implementation (NSDI 14) , pages
203–216, 2014.[40] Alexander Krentsel, Nitika Saran, Bikash Koley, Subhasree
Mandal, Ashok Narayanan, Sylvia Ratnasamy, Ali Al-Shabibi,
Anees Shaikh, Rob Shakir, Ankit Singla, et al. A decentralized
sdn architecture for the wan. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGCOMM 2024 Conference , pages 938–953, 2024.
[41] Umesh Krishnaswamy, Rachee Singh, Nikolaj Bjørner, and
Himanshu Raj. Decentralized cloud wide-area network traffic
engineering with {BLASTSHIELD }. In19th USENIX Sympo-
sium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI
22), pages 325–338, 2022.
[42] Umesh Krishnaswamy, Rachee Singh, Paul Mattes, Paul-
Andre C Bissonnette, Nikolaj Bjørner, Zahira Nasrin, Sonal
Kothari, Prabhakar Reddy, John Abeln, Srikanth Kandula, et al.
{OneWAN }is better than two: Unifying a split {WAN}archi-
tecture. In 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (NSDI 23) , pages 515–529, 2023.
[43] Jie Li, Vasileios Giotsas, Yangyang Wang, and Shi Zhou. Bgp-
multipath routing in the internet. IEEE Transactions on Net-
work and Service Management , 19(3):2812–2826, 2022.
[44] Xing Li, Xiaochong Jiang, Ye Yang, Lilong Chen, Yi Wang,
Chao Wang, Chao Xu, Yilong Lv, Bowen Yang, Taotao Wu,
et al. Triton: A flexible hardware offloading architecture for
accelerating apsara vswitch in alibaba cloud. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference , pages 750–763, 2024.
[45] Xing Li, Enge Song, Bowen Yang, Tian Pan, Ye Yang, Qiang
Fu, Yang Song, Yilong Lv, Zikang Chen, Jianyuan Lu, et al.
Nezha: Smartnic-based virtual switch load sharing. In Proceed-
ings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2025 Conference , pages 218–233,
2025.
[46] Yadong Liu, Yunming Xiao, Xuan Zhang, Weizhen Dang, Hui-
hui Liu, Xiang Li, Zekun He, Jilong Wang, Aleksandar Kuz-
manovic, Ang Chen, et al. Unlocking {ECMP }programma-
bility for precise traffic control. In 22nd USENIX Symposium
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 25) ,
pages 87–106, 2025.
[47] Jianyuan Lu, Tian Pan, Shan He, Mao Miao, Guangzhe Zhou,
Yining Qi, Shize Zhang, Enge Song, Xiaoqing Sun, Huaiyi
Zhao, et al. Cloudsentry: Two-stage heavy hitter detection for
cloud-scale gateway overload protection. IEEE Transactions
on Parallel and Distributed Systems , 35(4):616–633, 2023.
[48] Jianyuan Lu, Shunmin Zhu, Jun Liang, Yuxiang Lin, Tian Pan,
Yisong Qiao, Yang Song, Wenqiang Su, Yixin Xie, Yanqiang Li,
et al. Albatross: A containerized cloud gateway platform with
fpga-accelerated packet-level load balancing. In Proceedings
of the ACM SIGCOMM 2025 Conference , pages 71–84, 2025.
[49] Yuanwei Lu, Guo Chen, Bojie Li, Kun Tan, Yongqiang Xiong,
Peng Cheng, Jiansong Zhang, Enhong Chen, and Thomas
Moscibroda. {Multi-Path }transport for {RDMA }in data-
centers. In 15th USENIX symposium on networked systems
design and implementation (NSDI 18) , pages 357–371, 2018.
[50] Mallik Mahalingam, Dinesh Dutt, Kenneth Duda, Puneet Agar-
wal, Lawrence Kreeger, T Sridhar, Mike Bursell, and Chris
Wright. Virtual extensible local area network (vxlan): A frame-
work for overlaying virtualized layer 2 networks over layer 3
networks. Technical report, 2014.
522    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association
--- Page 16 ---
[51] Rui Miao, Hongyi Zeng, Changhoon Kim, Jeongkeun Lee, and
Minlan Yu. Silkroad: Making stateful layer-4 load balanc-
ing fast and cheap using switching asics. In Proceedings of
the Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data
Communication , pages 15–28, 2017.
[52] Ping Pan, George Swallow, and Alia Atlas. Fast reroute exten-
sions to rsvp-te for lsp tunnels. Technical report, 2005.
[53] Tian Pan, Kun Liu, Xionglie Wei, Yisong Qiao, Jun Hu, Zhiguo
Li, Jun Liang, Tiesheng Cheng, Wenqiang Su, Jie Lu, et al.
{LuoShen }: A{Hyper-Converged }programmable gateway for
{Multi-Tenant }{Multi-Service }edge clouds. In 21st USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
(NSDI 24) , pages 877–892, 2024.
[54] Tian Pan, Enge Song, Yueshang Zuo, Shaokai Zhang, Yang
Song, Jiangu Zhao, Wengang Hou, Jianyuan Lu, Xiaoqing Sun,
Shize Zhang, et al. Hermes: Enhancing layer-7 cloud load
balancers with userspace-directed i/o event notification. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2025 Conference , pages
363–380, 2025.
[55] Tian Pan, Nianbing Yu, Chenhao Jia, Jianwen Pi, Liang Xu,
Yisong Qiao, Zhiguo Li, Kun Liu, Jie Lu, Jianyuan Lu, et al.
Sailfish: Accelerating cloud-scale multi-tenant multi-service
gateways with programmable switches. In Proceedings of
the 2021 ACM SIGCOMM 2021 Conference , pages 194–206,
2021.
[56] Ben Pfaff, Justin Pettit, Teemu Koponen, Ethan Jackson, Andy
Zhou, Jarno Rajahalme, Jesse Gross, Alex Wang, Joe Stringer,
Pravin Shelar, et al. The design and implementation of open
{vSwitch }. In12th USENIX symposium on networked systems
design and implementation (NSDI 15) , pages 117–130, 2015.
[57] Kun Qiu, Jin Zhao, Xin Wang, Xiaoming Fu, and Stefano Secci.
Efficient recovery path computation for fast reroute in large-
scale software-defined networks. IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications , 37(8):1755–1768, 2019.
[58] Mubashir Adnan Qureshi, Yuchung Cheng, Qianwen Yin,
Qiaobin Fu, Gautam Kumar, Masoud Moshref, Junhua Yan,
Van Jacobson, David Wetherall, and Abdul Kabbani. Plb: con-
gestion signals are simple and effective for network load balanc-
ing. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2022 Conference ,
pages 207–218, 2022.
[59] Matthew Roughan, Mikkel Thorup, and Yin Zhang. Traffic
engineering with estimated traffic matrices. In Proceedings of
the 3rd ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet Measurement ,
pages 248–258, 2003.
[60] Arjun Roy, Deepak Bansal, David Brumley, Harish Kumar
Chandrappa, Parag Sharma, Rishabh Tewari, Behnaz Arzani,
and Alex C Snoeren. Cloud datacenter sdn monitoring: Expe-
riences and challenges. In Proceedings of the Internet Mea-
surement Conference 2018 , pages 464–470, 2018.
[61] Leah Shalev, Hani Ayoub, Nafea Bshara, and Erez Sabbag. A
cloud-optimized transport protocol for elastic and scalable hpc.
IEEE micro , 40(6):67–73, 2020.
[62] Cha Hwan Song, Xin Zhe Khooi, Raj Joshi, Inho Choi, Jialin
Li, and Mun Choon Chan. Network load balancing with in-
network reordering support for rdma. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGCOMM 2023 Conference , pages 816–831, 2023.[63] David Sontag, Yang Zhang, Amar Phanishayee, David G An-
dersen, and David Karger. Scaling all-pairs overlay routing.
InProceedings of the 5th international conference on Emerg-
ing networking experiments and technologies , pages 145–156,
2009.
[64] Sucha Supittayapornpong, Barath Raghavan, and Ramesh
Govindan. Towards highly available clos-based wan routers.
InProceedings of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data
Communication , pages 424–440. 2019.
[65] Feng Tian, Yang Zhang, Wei Ye, Cheng Jin, Ziyan Wu, and
Zhi-Li Zhang. Accelerating distributed deep learning using
multi-path rdma in data center networks. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGCOMM Symposium on SDN Research (SOSR) , pages
88–100, 2021.
[66] Lan Wang, Malleswari Saranu, Joel M Gottlieb, and Dan Pei.
Understanding bgp session failures in a large isp. In IEEE
INFOCOM 2007-26th IEEE International Conference on Com-
puter Communications , pages 348–356. IEEE, 2007.
[67] Zilong Wang, Layong Luo, Qingsong Ning, Chaoliang Zeng,
Wenxue Li, Xinchen Wan, Peng Xie, Tao Feng, Ke Cheng,
Xiongfei Geng, et al. {SRNIC }: A scalable architecture for
{RDMA }{NICs}. In20th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23) , pages 1–14,
2023.
[68] Chengkun Wei, Xing Li, Ye Yang, Xiaochong Jiang, Tianyu
Xu, Bowen Yang, Taotao Wu, Chao Xu, Yilong Lv, Haifeng
Gao, et al. Achelous: Enabling programmability, elasticity, and
reliability in hyperscale cloud networks. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGCOMM 2023 Conference , pages 769–782, 2023.
[69] David Wetherall, Abdul Kabbani, Van Jacobson, Jim Winget,
Yuchung Cheng, Charles B Morrey III, Uma Moravapalle,
Phillipa Gill, Steven Knight, and Amin Vahdat. Improving
network availability with protective reroute. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGCOMM 2023 Conference , pages 684–695, 2023.
[70] Damon Wischik, Costin Raiciu, Adam Greenhalgh, and Mark
Handley. Design, implementation and evaluation of congestion
control for multipath {TCP}. In8th USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 11) ,
2011.
[71] Shinae Woo, Justine Sherry, Sangjin Han, Sue Moon, Sylvia
Ratnasamy, and Scott Shenker. Elastic scaling of stateful net-
work functions. In 15th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 18) , pages 299–
312, 2018.
[72] Bingyang Wu, Kun Qian, Bo Li, Yunfei Ma, Qi Zhang, Zhi-
gang Jiang, Jiayu Zhao, Dennis Cai, Ennan Zhai, Xuanzhe Liu,
et al. Xron: A hybrid elastic cloud overlay network for video
conferencing at planetary scale. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGCOMM 2023 Conference , pages 696–709, 2023.
[73] Dingming Wu, Yiting Xia, Xiaoye Steven Sun, Xin Sunny
Huang, Simbarashe Dzinamarira, and TS Eugene Ng. Masking
failures from application performance in data center networks
with shareable backup. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication ,
pages 176–190, 2018.
USENIX Association 23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    523
--- Page 17 ---
[74] Xipeng Xiao, Alan Hannan, Brook Bailey, and Lionel M Ni.
Traffic engineering with mpls in the internet. IEEE network ,
14(2):28–33, 2000.
[75] Tingting Xu, Bengbeng Xue, Yang Song, Xiaomin Wu, Xiaoxin
Peng, Yilong Lyu, Xiaoliang Wang, Chen Tian, Baoliu Ye,
Camtu Nguyen, et al. {CyberStar }: Simple, elastic and {Cost-
Effective }network functions management in cloud network at
scale. In 2024 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX
ATC 24) , pages 227–246, 2024.
[76] Yunhong Xu, Keqiang He, Rui Wang, Minlan Yu, Nick
Duffield, Hassan Wassel, Shidong Zhang, Leon Poutievski,
Junlan Zhou, and Amin Vahdat. Hashing design in modern net-
works: Challenges and mitigation techniques. In 2022 USENIX
Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 22) , pages 805–
818, 2022.
[77] Wensong Zhang et al. Linux virtual server for scalable network
services. In Ottawa Linux Symposium , volume 2000, 2000.
[78] Zhehui Zhang, Haiyang Zheng, Jiayao Hu, Xiangning Yu,
Chenchen Qi, Xuemei Shi, and Guohui Wang. Hashing lin-earity enables relative path control in data centers. In 2021
USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 21) ,
pages 855–862, 2021.
[79] Zhilong Zheng, Yunfei Ma, Yanmei Liu, Furong Yang, Zhenyu
Li, Yuanbo Zhang, Jiuhai Zhang, Wei Shi, Wentao Chen, Ding
Li, et al. Xlink: Qoe-driven multi-path quic transport in large-
scale video services. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIG-
COMM 2021 Conference , pages 418–432, 2021.
[80] Zhizhen Zhong, Manya Ghobadi, Alaa Khaddaj, Jonathan
Leach, Yiting Xia, and Ying Zhang. Arrow: restoration-aware
traffic engineering. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIG-
COMM 2021 Conference , pages 560–579, 2021.
[81] Shunmin Zhu, Jianyuan Lu, Biao Lyu, Tian Pan, Chenhao Jia,
Xin Cheng, Daxiang Kang, Yilong Lv, Fukun Yang, Xiaobo
Xue, et al. Zoonet: a proactive telemetry system for large-
scale cloud networks. In Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and Tech-
nologies , pages 321–336, 2022.
524    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association
--- Page 18 ---
Appendices
A ZooRoute Protocol Specification
To ensure reliable operation across massive VTEPs in large
CSPs, we design a protocol for ZooRoute agents guided by
the following key principles.
Telemetry veracity. To accurately probe tenant traffic paths,
ZooRoute constructs UDP-based probe packets aligned with
the VXLAN encapsulation used in Alibaba Cloud. Besides,
in production, device hot upgrades or live migrations may
change the states of probing processes, compromising path
analysis consistency and introducing noises unrelated to the
actual network path status. ZooRoute embeds a probe pro-
cess index in the packet body as a unique identifier to detect
process changes and filter out the resulting dirty data.
Partial deployment support. In production, new features roll
out gradually across versions. Therefore, the source VTEP
issues a negotiation request before probing to clarify its func-
tion version with the destination VTEP.
VTEP controllability. ZooRoute is a distributed system runs
at VTEP side; each VTEP must observe and regulate its prob-
ing tasks. We add a "CTL" field with four modes: 1) default
for normal probing; 2) RST to re-negotiate between source
and destination; 3) BP for backpressure to throttle the source’s
probing frequency; 4) FIN to terminate the probing task.
Heterogeneous devices compatibility. To simply telemetry
packet processing, ZooRoute sets a "Reflect data" field at
the tail of each packet. This field uniformly covers diverse
information that only needs to be processed by source hosts.
Different types of source hosts can define the contents of this
field independently, for example, sport, process ID, etc. This
design simplifies the format of ZooRoute protocol, making it
easily compatible with heterogeneous underlying devices in
large CSPs. Besides, it curtails the parsing burden on target
hosts, which is important for hardware devices.
The detailed explanation of each field in ZooRoute protocol
is as follows:
•Magic Number : set as 0xffeedd to distinguish ZooRoute
packets from those of other business traffic.
•PKT Type : indicates packet type with 0x11 for negotiation
request, 0x18 for negotiation response, 0x7E for telemetry
request, 0x7F for telemetry response, and 0x05 for path table
updates. Note that, for VTEPs that do not support ZooRoute,
the "Magic Number" field overlaps with the "Flags" field
in VXLAN-GPE [23], and "Pkt Type" will be parsed as
"Next Protocol". Therefore, values in "Next Protocol" field
of VXLAN-GPE, like 0x1,0x02 , should not be picked as
PKT Type.
•Version : identifies the version number of current protocol.
•Mode : for negotiation packets, this field indicates all teleme-
try modes supported by the VTEP. For telemetry packets, it
shows the current mode.•CTL : this field is utilized by VTEPs to control probing
tasks, with 0x0as the default value for normal probing; 0x1
as RST to let the source VTEP reconduct negotiation, 0x2as
BP, telling the source VTEP to reduce telemetry frequency;
0x4asFIN, making the source VTEP stop probing.
•Data Length : total length of the data packet.
•Sequence ID : each packet is assigned a sequence number,
starting from 0, to detect packet disorder and provide timely
feedback when problems occur on the current probing path.
•Src IP : IP address of the source VTEP.
•Backend ID : as described in §6, this field records MAC
address of the middlebox in stateful forwarding scenarios.
•Reflect Data : This field carries source-only metadata and is
ignored by the destination VTEP. Different types of source
VTEPs can define its own schema. For example, It may
include source port for path recording. Besides, the source
VTEP can record a probe-process ID, so that dual processes
during hot upgrades or live migration can be disambiguated,
preserving the accuracy of path probing.
Bits 0-3 4-7 8-13 14-15 16-23 24-31
Magic Number PKT Type
Version Mode CTL Reserved Data Length
Sequence ID
Src IP
Backend ID
Reflect Data (16 bytes)IP Header UDP Header Payload (ZooRoute)Bits 0-3 4-7 8-13 14-15 16-23 24-31
Magic Number PKT Type
Version Mode CTL Reserved Data Length
Src IP
Reflect Data (16 bytes)IP Header UDP Header Payload (ZooRoute)
(a) Negotiation packet (request & response)
Bits 0-3 4-7 8-13 14-15 16-23 24-31
Magic Number PKT Type
Version Mode CTL Reserved Data Length
Sequence ID
Src IP
Backend ID
Reflect Data (16 bytes)IP Header UDP Header Payload (ZooRoute)Bits 0-3 4-7 8-13 14-15 16-23 24-31
Magic Number PKT Type
Version Mode CTL Reserved Data Length
Src IP
Reflect Data (16 bytes)IP Header UDP Header Payload (ZooRoute)
(b) Telemetry packet (request & response)
Figure A1: Packet format of ZooRoute protocol.
B Additional Tables and Figures
Table A1: Root causes of failures with unusually long de-
tection time ( d_time) or recovery time ( r_time) in Alibaba
Cloud from 2022-01-01 to 2023-03-3.
Root causes Avg.
d_timeAvg.
r_time# of cases
ISP network failure 22.4 99 13
Physical switch card exception 38.8 65.7 6
Physical switch CPU core overload 17.5 304 2
Network change or upgrade 31 16.5 2
Configuration error or inconsistency 13 27 1
In total 24
USENIX Association 23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    525
--- Page 19 ---
Table A2: Packet retransmission and CPU utilization under
different degrees of packet out-of-order.
Traffic Path switching # of retransmission CPU usagesaa
2GbpsNo changes 0 28.0%
N = 64 0 29.4%
N = 32 0 32.1%
N = 16 0 35.1%
N = 1 0 41.2%
4GbpsNo changes 0 49.9%
N = 64 0 51.5%
N = 32 0 55.7%
N = 16 0 61.2%
N = 1 0 70.0%
Table A2 explanation. While path switching bypasses fail-
ures, it may introduce packet reorder. We therefore stress-test
whether such out-of-order delivery harms transport. Using
Alibaba Cloud’s most common VM instance (ecs.g7.large),
we generate 2Gbps and 4Gbps TCP traffic and syntheti-
cally induce out-of-order by switching the path every N∈
{64,32,16,1}packets. Results indicate that Linux kernel’s
in-order reassembly tolerates the induced out-of-order without
triggering retransmissions. When dealing with mild out-of-
order (N=64), which is already more severe than ZooRoute
would cause, the CPU usage only increases by less than 2%
relative to the no-switch baseline at both rates. Techniques
mitigating severe out-of-order in load balancing or multipath
settings [61,62,67] are orthogonal to ZooRoute, they can com-
plement each other to respectively ensure fast failure recovery
and enhance network performance.
Same ASW Same PSW 
 (different ASW)Same DSW 
 (different PSW)
Scenario051015Std of CPU usage (%)Np=8
Np=16
Np=32
Np=64
Figure A2: CPU load balance of destination VTEPs in various
src-dst server pair placements under different Np.
Fig. A2 explanation. ZooRoute prefers a more orthogonal
source port selection to prevent traffic from concentrating
on a single underlay path, which could render many source
ports simultaneously unavailable if that path fails. Although
hundreds of ECMP paths exist between servers, traffic to a
single server is ultimately hashed by the NIC onto a limited
number of CPU cores. As long as CPU utilization remains
balanced, the likelihood of network-level traffic polarization
is further reduced. Therefore, we set Npbased on the CPU
usage distributions of the destination VTEPs. Alibaba Cloud
employs a standard three-tier regional topology, with Top-of-
Rack access switches (ASW), Points-of-Delivery aggregation
switches (PSW), and core Distribution switches (DSW). Inthe experiment, we randomly select 10 src-dst server pairs
for each placement scenarios: i) same ASW, ii) same PSW
but different ASWs, and iii) same DSW but different PSWs.
Fig. A2 reports, under identical traffic, the mean standard
deviation (std) of CPU utilization at the destination while
varying Np∈ {8,16,32,64}. We find that Np=32achieves
near-optimal load balance across all scenarios. Increasing
toNp=64yields only marginal gains (<0.4% reduction in
std) while roughly doubling telemetry overhead; hence we
default to Np=32. Before and after ZooRoute deployment, no
significant change in link utilization distribution is observed.
intra-AZ inter-AZ cross-region
Scenario50100150Range of RTT (us) 5101520
Range of RTT (ms)
Figure A3: Distribution of RTT range ( i.e.,RTT max−RTT min)
in different scenarios.
17:32:15 19:39:03 21:45:53 23:52:42
Timestamp220230240250RTT (ms)wo
w
Figure A4: RTT between cross-region gateways w/wo
ZooRoute guided path selection.
Fig. A3 explanation. We randomly select 50 pairs of VTEPs
for intra -AZ, inter -AZ, and cross -region scenarios. For each
pair, the source VTEP changes the source port 1,000 times to
traverse diverse ECMP paths. We compute P999 RTT ranges
(i.e.,RTT max−RTT min) per pair and plot the distributions.
The RTT range is 10~20 usintra-AZ and 100~150 usinter-AZ,
which is acceptable for such deployments. Cross -region pairs
exhibit much larger ranges, up to 20 ms, indicating substantial
headroom for ZooRoute-guided "better path" selection.
Fig. A4 explanation. This figure shows RTT between gate-
ways in two different regions under normal operations. We
can see that ZooRoute -guided path selection reduces RTT by
more than 20 ms(about 10%) compared to the unguided base-
line. Our current heuristic is simple: select the top 10% source
ports with the lowest latency and drop a port if its telemetry
shows persistent fluctuation for more than 2 min. This is being
A/B tested with a small subset of major tenants. We plan to
incorporate underlying link -utilization distributions to further
stabilize path selections, ensuring that traffic rerouting does
not induce RTT oscillations.
526    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association
